Add new float host functions and versioning rules (#504)
XRPLF/XRPL-Standards: XLS-0102-wasm-vm/README.md

### 5.8. Floats

> Helper functions for performing floating point arithmetic via rippled. These are used for any calculation requiring

Reviewer: I'd prefer not having line breaks in paragraphs - we don't have a max line length set in this repo, and IDEs will wrap text.

Author: Sound good. Fixed via 97a29a32a2cb672ea7fb5200eac574caf5786853

XRPL's decimal floating point format — including IOU amounts, lending protocol math, fee calculations, or arbitrary
numeric operations within a smart contract.

> All float buffers (`OpaqueFloat`) are exactly **12 bytes**: a 4-byte big-endian signed exponent (`i32`) followed by

Reviewer: Do you want to start calling it `xfloat` here?

Author: Good idea. Fixed via 067425a40c51aa4c4067e18763d72ada0d54ff58

> All float buffers (`OpaqueFloat`) are exactly **12 bytes**: a 4-byte big-endian signed exponent (`i32`) followed by

Reviewer 2: It is 8 bytes mantissa and then 4 bytes exponent. And do you still want to put this description here? It is "**opaque** float".

Author: Can you clarify what you're comment is. I'm not seeing a divergence in the document.

Author: Fixed via 21ca49e05a283165030b7be5d3e83422a6f7af54

an 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa (`i64`). Contracts must treat these buffers as opaque and must not decode or
construct them directly — all operations must go through these host functions.

The `rounding_modes` parameter accepts: `0` = round to nearest (ties to even), `1` = toward zero, `2` = downward
(floor), `3` = upward (ceiling).

| Function Signature                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Description                                                                       | Gas Cost |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------|

> | `float_from_int(`<br/>&emsp;`in_int: i64,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                                                    | Create a float in rippled format from a 64-bit integer.                           | 100      |

Reviewer 2: Do we need this if we have `float_from_mant_exp`  which can fully replace `float_from_int`?

Author: I think you're correct, we don't seem to need this. WDYT @pwang200 @mvadari

Author: Fixed via 1d4d63a64c923c6f8f3d3473ff75a69236d3bd2b

| `float_from_mant_exp(`<br/>&emsp;`mantissa: i64,`<br/>&emsp;`exponent: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                  | Create a float in rippled format from an exponent and a mantissa.                 | 100      |
| `float_from_stamount(`<br/>&emsp;`stamount_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`stamount_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32`<br />`)`                                                                           | Load a float from the bytes of a serialized STAmount.                             | 150      |
| `float_from_stnumber(`<br/>&emsp;`stnumber_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`stnumber_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32`<br />`)`                                                                           | Load a float from a serialized STNumber value, validating and normalizing it.     | 150      |

> | `float_to_int(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                             | Convert a float to a signed 64-bit integer, applying the specified rounding mode. | 130      |

Reviewer 2: Do we need it if we have `float_to_mant_exp` ?

Author: Fixed via 1d4d63a64c923c6f8f3d3473ff75a69236d3bd2b

| `float_negate(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32`<br />`)`                                                                                              | Negate a float.                                                                   | 150      |
| `float_pow(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`pow: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                          | Compute the nth power of a float in rippled format.                               | 5500     |
| `float_root(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`root: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                        | Compute the nth root of a float in rippled format.                                | 5500     |

#### 5.8.1. OpaqueFloat Type

> `OpaqueFloat` is an opaque 12-byte (96-bit) floating point number, consisting of a 4-byte signed exponent followed by an

Reviewer 2: 8 mantissa then 4 exponent

Author: Fixed via 74422bd62e67b871eb74fa87d2dfed5f01b61eed

8-byte signed mantissa. rippled's `Number` class is the core decimal floating-point type used throughout the ledger; all
`OpaqueFloat` arithmetic is delegated to it via host functions.

> **Important — treat as opaque:** Smart contracts SHOULD NOT inspect, decode, or construct `OpaqueFloat` bytes directly.

Reviewer: I think we need a bit of a "why" in this explanation - which I think is mostly just that it's gas-inefficient

Author: Hmmm... in my mind "gas inefficient" isn't the primary reason I would cite here. Instead, we don't want developers to write a contract that expects a certain byte layout, then later we change the byte layout and it breaks their contract. 

I also think this idea goes away if we ditch the concept of `XFloat` and just say, "this is an STNumber" but that potentially causes other problems.

Author: In any event, for now I've updated the text per your suggestion. See 21ca49e05a283165030b7be5d3e83422a6f7af54

> All operations SHOULD go through the host functions defined in §5.8. A contract that reads or writes the

Reviewer: Add links in the section references

Author: Fixed via d28f5b948a5a2420f208e02d6a38651c3b655cc3

numeric operations within a smart contract.

All float buffers (`OpaqueFloat`) are exactly **12 bytes**: a 4-byte big-endian signed exponent (`i32`) followed by
an 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa (`i64`). Contracts must treat these buffers as opaque and must not decode or
construct them directly — all operations must go through these host functions.

The `rounding_modes` parameter accepts: `0` = round to nearest (ties to even), `1` = toward zero, `2` = downward
(floor), `3` = upward (ceiling).

| Function Signature                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Description                                                                       | Gas Cost |
| :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :------- |

> | `float_from_int(`<br/>&emsp;`in_int: i64,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                                                                 | Create a float in rippled format from a 64-bit integer.                           | 100      |

Author: Thanks for your comment @gip. 

For the sake of consistency, we intentionally make all host functions that accept a pointer specify the length. We check those lengths in C++ too, so if a buffer length is known, xrpld will catch any discrepency.

We also assume that most developers will not be calling these host functions directly. In Rust, for example, the actual host functions are wrapped by more idiomatic Rust code.

| `float_from_uint(`<br/>&emsp;`in_uint_ptr: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_uint_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                             | Create a float in rippled format from a 64-bit unsigned integer.                  | 130      |

> | `float_set(`<br/>&emsp;`exponent: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`mantissa: i64,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                                         | Create a float in rippled format from an exponent and a mantissa.                 | 100      |

Author: ```suggestion
| `float_from_mantissa_and_exponent(`<br/>&emsp;`exponent: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`mantissa: i64,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                                         | Create a float in rippled format from an exponent and a mantissa.                 | 100      |
```

Reviewer 3: `float_from_m_e`

Author: Fixed via 86da5b3fa76e49e069cd60fee00c3a3ab1720084

| `float_from_stamount(`<br/>&emsp;`stamount_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`stamount_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32`<br />`)`                                                                                        | Load a float from the bytes of a serialized STAmount.                             | 150      |
| `float_from_stnumber(`<br/>&emsp;`stnumber_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`stnumber_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32`<br />`)`                                                                                        | Load a float from a serialized STNumber value, validating and normalizing it.     | 150      |
| `float_to_int(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                                          | Convert a float to a signed 64-bit integer, applying the specified rounding mode. | 130      |

> | `float_to_mantissa_and_exponent(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`mantissa_out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`mantissa_out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`exponent_out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`exponent_out_len: i32`<br />`)` | Extract the mantissa (i64) and exponent (i32) from a float.                       | 130      |

Reviewer 3: `float_to_m_e`

Author: Fixed via 86da5b3fa76e49e069cd60fee00c3a3ab1720084

| `float_subtract(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                  | Subtract two floats in rippled format.                                            | 160      |
| `float_multiply(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                  | Multiply two floats in rippled format.                                            | 300      |
| `float_divide(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                    | Divide two floats in rippled format.                                              | 300      |

> | `float_negate(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32`<br />`)`                                                                                                           | Negate a float.                                                                   | 150      |

Author: I propose we remove this host function (`float_negate`) because developers can multiply by negative one.

Author: Current consensus with @pwang200 @mvadari @oleks-rip to remove this.

@dangell7 do you have any opinion or objection to removing this one?

Reviewer 4: Remove

Author: Agreed. We'll remove.

Reviewer 5: At the hardware level `-x` is executed efficiently and doesn't need a multiplication, while `(-1)*a` may unless optimized away. Curious how/where that will be optimized?

Author: This won't be optimized (it will cost a bit more gas). However, the gas cost should be negligible for now, and if we see demand for optimizing this, we can add it later.

(For now we want to reduce the # of host functions as much as possible).

> | `float_abs(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32`<br />`)`                                                                                                              | Absolute value of a float.                                                        | 150      |

Author: I propose we remove this host function (`float_abs`) for the following reasons:

1. We have `float_compare` that le'ts us determine the sign of a float using that an a `float_zero` (using `float_from_uint`. Then we can use `float_multiply` using a `float_negative_one`.
2. Due to the "one we have a host function, we likely have it forever" ideas introduced by this PR, we should not add host function until they are _absolutely_ necessary. This one is not absolutely necessary, and if we find people requesting it, we can add it later.

Author: Current consensus with @pwang200 @mvadari @oleks-rip to remove this.

@dangell7 do you have any opinion or objection to removing this one?

Reviewer 4: Remove

Author: Agreed. We'll remove.

Author: Removed via 0d64625f9e88186f3f2251a71b98e49b981c88cc

> | `float_sign(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32`<br />`)`                                                                                                                                                                 | Sign of a float. Returns `-1` (negative), `0` (zero), or `1` (positive).          | 150      |

Author: I propose we remove this host function (`float_sign`) for the following reasons:

1. We have `float_compare`, we can determine the sign of a float using that an a `float_zero` (using `float_from_uint`.
2. Due to the "one we have a host function, we likely have it forever" ideas introduced by this PR, we should not add host function until they are _absolutely_ necessary. This one is not absolutely necessary, and if we find people requesting it, we can add it later.

Author: NOTE: This function is also not in the current implementation.

Author: Current consensus with @pwang200 @mvadari @oleks-rip to remove this.

@dangell7 do you have any opinion or objection to removing this one?

Author: Agreed. We'll remove.

Author: Removed via 0d64625f9e88186f3f2251a71b98e49b981c88cc

> | `float_pow(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`pow: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                       | Compute the nth power of a float in rippled format.                               | 5500     |

Author: I propose we remove this host function (`float_pow`) until someone requests it. We have a lot (too many?) host functions related to float, so we should not preemptively over-engineer here because we're likely stuck with these forever.

Author: Current consensus with @pwang200 @mvadari @oleks-rip to remove this.

@dangell7 do you have any opinion or objection to removing this one?

Reviewer 4: I use this in a contract I made this weekend.

Author: Decision: We'll keep this one, to enable things like an AMM.

> | `float_root(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`root: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                     | Compute the nth root of a float in rippled format.                                | 5500     |

Author: I propose we remove this host function (`float_root`) until someone requests it. We have a lot (too many?) host functions related to float, so we should not preemptively over-engineer here because we're likely stuck with these forever.

Author: Current consensus with @pwang200 @mvadari @oleks-rip to remove this.

@dangell7 do you have any opinion or objection to removing this one?

Reviewer 4: I use this in a contract I made this weekend.

Reviewer: @dangell7 can you give a high-level explanation of how you use it?

Reviewer 4: I was building AMMs

Author: Decision: We'll keep this one, to enable things like an AMM.

> | `float_log(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                                             | Compute the 10 based log of a float in rippled format.                            | 12000    |

Author: I propose we remove this host function (`float_log`) until someone requests it. We have a lot (too many?) host functions related to float, so we should not preemptively over-engineer here because we're likely stuck with these forever.

Author: Decision made with @pwang200 @mvadari @oleks-rip: We'll remove this from the host functions (and this spec) and from rippled `Number` C++ class.

Author: Agreed. We'll remove.

Author: Removed via 36b62abfc0ff36b30b249ffa8bbd2fa2ac7b4ca8

| `float_mult(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)` | Multiply two floats in rippled format.                            | 300      |
| `float_div(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`  | Divide two floats in rippled format.                              | 300      |
| `float_pow(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`pow: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                  | Compute the nth power of a float in rippled format.               | 5500     |
| `float_root(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`root: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                | Compute the nth root of a float in rippled format.                | 5500     |

> | `float_log(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                                        | Compute the 10 based log of a float in rippled format.            | 12000    |

Author: Decision to remove `float_log` is here: https://github.com/XRPLF/XRPL-Standards/pull/504#pullrequestreview-4108573471

> All float buffers (`XFloat`) are exactly **12 bytes**: An 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa (`i64`) followed by a 4-byte big-endian signed exponent (`i32`). Contracts must treat these buffers as opaque and must not decode or construct them directly — all operations must go through these host functions.

Author: ```suggestion
All float buffers (`XFloat`) are exactly **12 bytes**. Contracts must treat these buffers as opaque and must not decode or construct them directly. Instead, all operations on XFloat types SHOULD go through these host functions.
```

| `float_div(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len1: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len2: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`          | Divide two floats in rippled format.                                          | 300      |
| `float_pow(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`pow: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                          | Compute the nth power of a float in rippled format.                           | 5500     |
| `float_root(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`root: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                        | Compute the nth root of a float in rippled format.                            | 5500     |

#### 5.8.1. XFloat Type

> `XFloat` is an opaque 12-byte (96-bit) floating point number that encodes an 8-byte signed mantissa and a 4-byte signed exponent. rippled's `Number` class is the core decimal floating-point type used throughout the ledger; all `XFloat` arithmetic is delegated to it via host functions.

Author: ```suggestion
`XFloat` is an opaque 12-byte (96-bit) floating point number. The `Number` class in `xrpld` is the core decimal floating-point type used throughout the ledger; all `XFloat` arithmetic is delegated to it via host functions.
```

> `XFloat` is an opaque 12-byte (96-bit) floating point number, consisting of an 8-byte signed mantissa followed by a 4-byte signed exponent. rippled's `Number` class is the core decimal floating-point type used throughout the ledger; all `XFloat` arithmetic is delegated to it via host functions.

Reviewer 2: Description of the format duplicate line 220

Author: See my proposed change up in line 220. I remove mention of 8/4 bytes (because up there it's supposed to be opqaue).

> `XFloat` is an opaque 12-byte (96-bit) floating point number, consisting of an 8-byte signed mantissa followed by a 4-byte signed exponent. rippled's `Number` class is the core decimal floating-point type used throughout the ledger; all `XFloat` arithmetic is delegated to it via host functions.

Author: ```suggestion
`XFloat` is an opaque 12-byte (96-bit) floating point number that encodes an 8-byte signed mantissa and a 4-byte signed exponent. rippled's `Number` class is the core decimal floating-point type used throughout the ledger; all `XFloat` arithmetic is delegated to it via host functions.
```

**Warning — do not persist XFloat bytes:** Contracts MUST NOT write `XFloat` buffers into contract storage (e.g., the `data` field of a smart escrow or smart feature). The 12-byte encoding is an in-memory convention tied to a specific version of rippled's implementation. If the encoding ever changes — which the versioning rules in [§5.11](#511-host-function-versioning-rules) explicitly allow for — stored bytes would become unreadable or silently misinterpreted by contracts running against the updated host functions.

If a contract needs to persist a floating point value across invocations, it should store the **mantissa and exponent as separate integers** in a contract-defined format, then reconstruct the `XFloat` at runtime using`float_from_mant_exp`. For example:

```rust
// Persisting: decompose into primitive integers and write to contract data
let exponent: i32 = /* obtained from contract logic */;

> let mantissa: i64 = /* obtained from contract logic */;

Reviewer 3: The example here uses `i32` and `i64` for `float_from_mant_exp`. 
The example in section "5.8.4. XFloat Example Usage" uses `[0u8; 8]` and `[0u8; 4]` for `float_to_mant_exp`. If I were the wasm coder, I'd wonder a bit how to convert between the 2 sets of formats.

Author: So, the standard way would be just this:

```rust
let mantissa = i64::from_be_bytes(mantissa_result_bytes);
let exponent = i32::from_be_bytes(exponent_result_bytes);
```

I can add that to the example in `5.8.4` - would that address your concenr?

(see my proposed change down below)

Author: Resolving this one (addressed below)

// Store exponent (4 bytes) and mantissa (8 bytes) in your own layout

// Restoring: reconstruct from stored integers
let mut f = [0u8; 12]; float_from_mant_exp(mantissa, exponent, f.as_mut_ptr(), 12, 0 /* TO_NEAREST */);
```

This approach uses only stable primitive types (`i32`, `i64`) and is completely independent of any future changes to the `XFloat` binary layout.

#### 5.8.2. XFloat Serialization Format

This section documents the `XFloat` encoding for **rippled implementers and tooling authors**. Contracts must not use this information to construct or decode buffers — they must use the host functions in [§5.8](#58-floats) exclusively.

`XFloat` uses a binary encoding inspired by, but not identical to, XRPL's `STNumber` serialization (which is why `float_from_stnumber` is a conversion function rather than a no-op):

> - **Layout:** 12 bytes total — 4-byte big-endian signed exponent followed by 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa

Author: @oleks-rip Can you confirm which bytes come first (exponent or mantissa?).

```
- **Layout:** 12 bytes total — 4-byte big-endian signed exponent followed by 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa
```

Author: This is fixed. Per @oleks-rip: "8 byte of mantissa followed by 4 bytes of exponent"

> - **Layout:** 12 bytes total — 4-byte big-endian signed exponent followed by 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa

Author: ```suggestion
- **Layout:** 12 bytes total — 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa followed by a 4-byte big-endian signed exponent.
```

> - **Layout:** 12 bytes total — 4-byte big-endian signed exponent followed by 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa

Reviewer 2: This also duplicate previous descriptions. Can you put it in 1 place?

Author: I've removed any formal mention of 8 and 4 bytes everywhere except here.

- **No type prefix:** The buffer contains only the 12 payload bytes
- **Consensus-compatible:** Produced and consumed exclusively by rippled's host function implementations

**Serialization Layout (96 bits / 12 bytes):**

```

> [Signed Exponent: 4 bytes (i32, big-endian)][Signed Mantissa: 8 bytes (i64, big-endian)]

Reviewer 2: Mantissa, exponent

```

**Field Descriptions:**

> - **Exponent** (bytes 0–3): Signed 32-bit integer (`i32`), big-endian. Represents the power of 10 applied to the mantissa.

Reviewer 2: Mantissa, exponent

Author: Fixed via 4259161a6fbf7bd3e9302203bd6f8c991efe76fe

  Result, Error,
};
use xrpl_wasm_stdlib::host::Result::{Ok, Err};

#[unsafe(no_mangle)]
pub extern "C" fn finish() -> i32 {
  // Load an XFloat from a serialized STAmount (IOU variant, 8 bytes)
  let stamount_bytes = [0u8; 8]; // obtained from transaction or ledger object
  let mut float_a = [0u8; 12];
  if float_from_stamount(
    stamount_bytes.as_ptr(), 8,
    float_a.as_mut_ptr(), 12,
  ) < 0 {
    return 0; // error
  }

  // Convert an integer to XFloat (exponent 0 → value is exactly the mantissa)
  let mut float_b = [0u8; 12];
  if float_from_mant_exp(100, 0, float_b.as_mut_ptr(), 12, 0) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

  // Add the two floats
  let mut result = [0u8; 12];
  if float_add(
    float_a.as_ptr(), 12,
    float_b.as_ptr(), 12,
    result.as_mut_ptr(), 12,
    0, // TO_NEAREST
  ) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

  // Extract mantissa and exponent; if exponent is 0, mantissa is the integer value
  let mut mantissa_result = [0u8; 8];
  let mut exponent_result = [0u8; 4];
  if float_to_mant_exp(
    result.as_ptr(), 12,
    mantissa_result.as_mut_ptr(), 8,
    exponent_result.as_mut_ptr(), 4,
  ) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

> 

Author: ```suggestion

let mantissa:i64 = i64::from_be_bytes(mantissa_result);
let exponent:i32 = i32::from_be_bytes(exponent_result);

```

#### 5.8.2. XFloat Serialization Format

This section documents the `XFloat` encoding for **rippled implementers and tooling authors**. Contracts must not use this information to construct or decode buffers — they must use the host functions in [§5.8](#58-floats) exclusively.

`XFloat` uses a binary encoding inspired by, but not identical to, XRPL's `STNumber` serialization (which is why `float_from_stnumber` is a conversion function rather than a no-op):

- **Layout:** 12 bytes total — 4-byte big-endian signed exponent followed by 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa
- **No type prefix:** The buffer contains only the 12 payload bytes
- **Consensus-compatible:** Produced and consumed exclusively by rippled's host function implementations

**Serialization Layout (96 bits / 12 bytes):**

```
[Signed Exponent: 4 bytes (i32, big-endian)][Signed Mantissa: 8 bytes (i64, big-endian)]
```

**Field Descriptions:**

- **Exponent** (bytes 0–3): Signed 32-bit integer (`i32`), big-endian. Represents the power of 10 applied to the mantissa.
- **Mantissa** (bytes 4–11): Signed 64-bit integer (`i64`), big-endian. Represents the significant digits of the value.

>   When normalized: 10^18 ≤ |mantissa| < 10^19 (i.e., 1,000,000,000,000,000,000 to 9,999,999,999,999,999,999), except for zero. This reflects the **large-scale** normalization range used by rippled's `Number` class, which is the default when the `SingleAssetVault` or `LendingProtocol` amendments are enabled. A legacy **small-scale** range (10^15 ≤ |mantissa| < 10^16) applies only when both amendments are disabled for backward compatibility with the `STAmount` IOU format. Note: because the large-scale mantissa can exceed `i64` max, rippled's `mantissa()` accessor divides the internal value by 10 and increments the exponent by 1 before returning it, so the `i64` value returned to WASM callers always fits in a signed 64-bit integer but may be one decimal digit shorter than the internal representation.

Reviewer 5: I'm trying to parse this sentence. Max value for i64 would be `2^63-1` since it is signed. 
`2^63 - 1 =  9,223,372,036,854,775,807` which is below `9,999,999,999,999,999,999`. I may not have the full context but I don't really get the `10^18 ≤ |mantissa| < 10^19` bit even if it is the normalized mantissa?

Reviewer 2: @gip internal mantissa is unsigned int64,which is `18,446,744,073,709,551,615` > `9,999,999,999,999,999,999`

### 5.8. Floats

Helper functions for performing floating point arithmetic via rippled. These are used for any calculation requiring XRPL's decimal floating point format — including IOU amounts, lending protocol math, fee calculations, or arbitrary numeric operations within a smart contract.

> All float buffers (`XFloat`) are exactly **12 bytes**: a 4-byte big-endian signed exponent (`i32`) followed by an 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa (`i64`). Contracts must treat these buffers as opaque and must not decode or construct them directly — all operations must go through these host functions.

Reviewer 3: The format here is "a 4-byte big-endian signed exponent (`i32`) followed by an 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa (`i64`)". The ordering of exponent and mantissa is inconsistent with the other format description.

Author: Fixed via 21ca49e05a283165030b7be5d3e83422a6f7af54

> All float buffers (`XFloat`) are exactly **12 bytes**: a 4-byte big-endian signed exponent (`i32`) followed by an 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa (`i64`). Contracts must treat these buffers as opaque and must not decode or construct them directly — all operations must go through these host functions.

Reviewer 2: It is 8 bytes signed matisa in big endian followed up by 4 bites signed exponent in big endian

Author: Fixed via 21ca49e05a283165030b7be5d3e83422a6f7af54

| `float_pow(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`pow: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                          | Compute the nth power of a float in rippled format.                               | 5500     |
| `float_root(`<br/>&emsp;`in_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`in_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`root: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_buf: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`out_len: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`rounding_modes: i32`<br />`)`                                        | Compute the nth root of a float in rippled format.                                | 5500     |

#### 5.8.1. XFloat Type

`XFloat` is an opaque 12-byte (96-bit) floating point number, consisting of an 8-byte signed mantissa followed by a 4-byte signed exponent. rippled's `Number` class is the core decimal floating-point type used throughout the ledger; all `XFloat` arithmetic is delegated to it via host functions.

> 

Reviewer 3: The format here is "consisting of an 8-byte signed mantissa followed by a 4-byte signed exponent". The ordering of exponent and mantissa is inconsistent with the other format description. 

I think this format is correct from reading the code here: https://github.com/XRPLF/rippled/blob/09c36d066ec6e1ffdcc6b98075c991e202873d5f/src/libxrpl/protocol/STNumber.cpp#L112

If so, the section "5.8.5. XFloat Binary Format Reference" should be updated as well.

Author: This section is correct; the other section was incorrect, but was fixed via 21ca49e05a283165030b7be5d3e83422a6f7af54

// Store exponent (4 bytes) and mantissa (8 bytes) in your own layout

// Restoring: reconstruct from stored integers
let mut f = [0u8; 12]; float_from_mant_exp(mantissa, exponent, f.as_mut_ptr(), 12, 0 /* TO_NEAREST */);
```

This approach uses only stable primitive types (`i32`, `i64`) and is completely independent of any future changes to the `XFloat` binary layout.

#### 5.8.2. XFloat Serialization Format

This section documents the `XFloat` encoding for **rippled implementers and tooling authors**. Contracts must not use this information to construct or decode buffers — they must use the host functions in [§5.8](#58-floats) exclusively.

`XFloat` uses a binary encoding inspired by, but not identical to, XRPL's `STNumber` serialization (which is why `float_from_stnumber` is a conversion function rather than a no-op):

- **Layout:** 12 bytes total — 8-byte big-endian signed mantissa followed by a 4-byte big-endian signed exponent.
- **No type prefix:** The buffer contains only the 12 payload bytes
- **Consensus-compatible:** Produced and consumed exclusively by rippled's host function implementations

**Serialization Layout (96 bits / 12 bytes):**

```

> [Signed Exponent: 4 bytes (i32, big-endian)][Signed Mantissa: 8 bytes (i64, big-endian)]

Author: ```suggestion
[Signed Mantissa: 8 bytes (i64, big-endian)][Signed Exponent: 4 bytes (i32, big-endian)]
```

```

**Field Descriptions:**

> - **Mantissa** (bytes 4–11): Signed 64-bit integer (`i64`), big-endian. Represents the significant digits of the value.

Reviewer 2: bytes 0-7

Author: ```suggestion
- **Mantissa** (bytes 0–7): Signed 64-bit integer (`i64`), big-endian. Represents the significant digits of the value.
```

  When normalized: 10^18 ≤ |mantissa| < 10^19 (i.e., 1,000,000,000,000,000,000 to 9,999,999,999,999,999,999), except for zero. This reflects the **large-scale** normalization range used by rippled's `Number` class, which is the default when the `SingleAssetVault` or `LendingProtocol` amendments are enabled. A legacy **small-scale** range (10^15 ≤ |mantissa| < 10^16) applies only when both amendments are disabled for backward compatibility with the `STAmount` IOU format. Note: because the large-scale mantissa can exceed `i64` max, rippled's `mantissa()` accessor divides the internal value by 10 and increments the exponent by 1 before returning it, so the `i64` value returned to WASM callers always fits in a signed 64-bit integer but may be one decimal digit shorter than the internal representation.

> - **Exponent** (bytes 0–3): Signed 32-bit integer (`i32`), big-endian. Represents the power of 10 applied to the mantissa.

Reviewer 2: bytes 8-11

> - **Exponent** (bytes 0–3): Signed 32-bit integer (`i32`), big-endian. Represents the power of 10 applied to the mantissa.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Exponent** (bytes 8-11): Signed 32-bit integer (`i32`), big-endian. Represents the power of 10 applied to the mantissa.
```

  let mut float_b = [0u8; 12];
  if float_from_mant_exp(100, 0, float_b.as_mut_ptr(), 12, 0) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

  // Add the two floats
  let mut result = [0u8; 12];
  if float_add(
    float_a.as_ptr(), 12,
    float_b.as_ptr(), 12,
    result.as_mut_ptr(), 12,
    0, // TO_NEAREST
  ) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

  // Extract mantissa and exponent; if exponent is 0, mantissa is the integer value
  let mut mantissa_result = [0u8; 8];
  let mut exponent_result = [0u8; 4];
  if float_to_mant_exp(
    result.as_ptr(), 12,
    mantissa_result.as_mut_ptr(), 8,
    exponent_result.as_mut_ptr(), 4,
  ) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

let mantissa:i64 = i64::from_be_bytes(mantissa_result);
let exponent:i32 = i32::from_be_bytes(exponent_result);

  1 // Success
}
```

#### 5.8.5. XFloat Binary Format Reference

> **For implementers and tooling authors only.** Contracts must never decode or construct `XFloat` bytes directly. This section exists to support rippled development, debuggers, explorers, and spec verification — not contract authors.

**XFloat layout (12 bytes):**

```
Offset  Size  Type   Description
------  ----  -----  -----------

> 0       4     i32    Signed exponent, big-endian

Reviewer 2: 0 7 mantissa

Author: Fixed.

> 4       8     i64    Signed mantissa, big-endian

Reviewer 2: 8 11 exponent

Author: Fixed.

```

**Zero value (12 bytes):**

```

> 00 00 00 00   <- exponent: 0

Reviewer 2: if there should be order, then mantissa first

Author: Good catch. Fixed via 2a158444e58dba9e442e0d8a1c9ae6b504037255

00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00   <- mantissa: 0
```

**Example: positive value with exponent -15, mantissa 10^15:**

```

> FF FF FF F1   <- exponent: -15 (i32 big-endian: 0xFFFFFFF1)

Reviewer 2: if there should be an order, then mantissa first

Author: Good catch. Fixed via  2a158444e58dba9e442e0d8a1c9ae6b504037255

### 5.8. Floats

> Helper functions for performing floating point arithmetic via rippled. These are used for any calculation requiring XRPL's decimal floating point format — including IOU amounts, lending protocol math, fee calculations, or arbitrary numeric operations within a smart contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Helper functions for performing floating point arithmetic via xrpld. These are used for any calculation requiring XRPL's decimal floating point format, including IOU amounts, lending protocol math, fee calculations, or arbitrary numeric operations within a smart contract.
```

Reviewer: Can you update all other instances of `rippled` to `xrpld` in this doc?

#### 5.8.1. The XFloat Type

Any floating point types in xrpld WASM is an opaque 12-byte (96-bit) buffer referred to in this document and in SDKs as an `XFloat`. The `Number` class in `xrpld` is the core decimal floating-point type used throughout the ledger; all floating point arithmetic is delegated to it via host functions.

Smart contracts SHOULD NOT inspect, decode, or construct XFloat bytes directly. All operations should instead go through the host functions defined in [§5.8](#58-floats). Bypassing host functions is gas-inefficient — each host call is priced to amortize the cost of the operation, and hand-rolling arithmetic in WASM bytecode incurs more gas for less precision. A contract that reads or writes the individual bytes of an XFloat buffer is also relying on an implementation detail that may change, and could produce incorrect or undefined behavior if it does. The buffer should be allocated, passed to a host functions, and discarded — nothing else.

> **Warning — do not persist XFloat bytes:** Contracts MUST NOT write XFloat buffers into contract storage (e.g., the `data` field of a smart feature). The 12-byte encoding is an in-memory convention tied to today's float host functions. Per [§5.11](#511-host-function-versioning-rules) rule 3, that encoding can never change for these functions — but a future need for a different layout would ship as a new host function under a new name, and bytes persisted under today's convention would not be readable by it.

Reviewer: You can use the Github warning block if you want here

If a contract needs to persist an XFloat across invocations, it should store the **mantissa and exponent as separate integers** in a contract-defined format, then reconstruct the XFloat at runtime using `float_from_mant_exp`. For example:

```rust
// Persisting: decompose into primitive integers and write to contract data
let exponent: i32 = /* obtained from contract logic */;
let mantissa: i64 = /* obtained from contract logic */;
// Store exponent (4 bytes) and mantissa (8 bytes) in your own layout

// Restoring: reconstruct from stored integers
let mut f = [0u8; 12]; float_from_mant_exp(mantissa, exponent, f.as_mut_ptr(), 12, 0 /* TO_NEAREST */);
```

This approach uses only stable primitive types (`i32`, `i64`) and is completely independent of any future changes to the XFloat binary layout.

#### 5.8.2. XFloat Serialization Format

> This section documents the XFloat encoding for **rippled implementers and tooling authors**. Contracts must not use this information to construct or decode buffers — they must use the host functions in [§5.8](#58-floats) exclusively.

Reviewer: This section seems unnecessary, I don't really think we need to assert literally everywhere that contracts shouldn't decode themselves

- **Zero:** Exponent and mantissa both `0` — all 12 bytes are `0x00`.
- **Null / uninitialized:** A distinct state used internally by rippled; contracts must not rely on specific byte patterns for this state.

**Relationship to On-Ledger Formats:**

The on-ledger wire format of any floating points numbers is unchanged. However, the byte layout is frequently incompatible with XFloat numbers accepted by float-prefixed host functions. For example, a fungible token amount in an `STAmount` field is not an XFloat. In particular:

```
[STAmount amount field: 8 bytes][Currency: 20 bytes][Issuer: 20 bytes] = 48 bytes total
```

The 12-byte XFloat format is strictly an in-memory buffer convention for passing values to and from WASM host functions. Values stored in ledger objects continue to use their existing serialization formats; the host function `float_from_iou_value` bridges the IOU amount format to WASM floating point numbers. `STNumber` values are decoded in Rust by `xrpl-wasm-stdlib` — for the IOU-precision case, the decoded 8-byte value is layout-identical to an `IouNumber` and is passed to `float_from_iou_value` directly, without a dedicated host function.

> #### 5.8.3. XFloat Motivation

Reviewer: This section should be higher up

> XRPL Smart Contracts running in WebAssembly need to perform correct decimal arithmetic. This need arises in many contexts: computing with fungible token amounts (IOUs), implementing lending protocols with interest and collateral ratios, calculating fees, and more.

Reviewer: `Smart Contracts` implies not Smart Escrows etc

Implementing xrpld floating-point arithmetic correctly is genuinely hard. Correct rounding, normalization, overflow handling, and edge-case behavior require a carefully engineered implementation. Implementing this correctly in WASM from scratch is not a reasonable expectation for contract developers, and cannot be practically verified or guaranteed. By delegating all arithmetic to rippled's `Number` class via host functions, contracts get a battle-tested implementation that is known to be correct for XRPL's numeric domain, even across amendment changes.

> Note that the XRPL WASM VM does not enable the WASM floating-point instruction set (i.e., `f32`/`f64` ops are unavailable to contracts). This means native IEEE 754 arithmetic is not an option regardless of determinism concerns. Contracts that need fixed-point arithmetic independent of the `XFloat` host functions — for example, to work with integer ratios or basis points — should consider crates like the [`fixed`](https://crates.io/crates/fixed) Rust crate, which performs fixed-point math entirely in integer instructions and is fully compatible with the `no_std`, `wasm32v1-none` build target.

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
Note that the XRPL WASM VM does not enable the WASM floating-point instruction set (i.e., `f32`/`f64` ops are unavailable to contracts). This means native IEEE 754 arithmetic is not an option regardless of determinism concerns. Contracts that need fixed-point arithmetic independent of the `XFloat` host functions (for example, to work with integer ratios or basis points) should consider crates like the [`fixed`](https://crates.io/crates/fixed) Rust crate, which performs fixed-point math entirely in integer instructions and is fully compatible with the `no_std`, `wasm32v1-none` build target.
```

  let iou_amount_bytes = [0u8; 8]; // obtained from transaction or ledger object
  let mut xfloat_a = [0u8; 12];
  if float_from_iou_value(
    iou_amount_bytes.as_ptr(), 8,
    xfloat_a.as_mut_ptr(), 12,
  ) < 0 {
    return 0; // error
  }

  // Convert an integer to XFloat (exponent 0 → value is exactly the mantissa)
  let mut xfloat_b = [0u8; 12];
  if float_from_mant_exp(100, 0, xfloat_b.as_mut_ptr(), 12, 0) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

  // Add the two floats
  let mut xfloat_result = [0u8; 12];
  if float_add(
    xfloat_a.as_ptr(), 12,
    xfloat_b.as_ptr(), 12,
    xfloat_result.as_mut_ptr(), 12,
    0, // TO_NEAREST
  ) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

  // Extract mantissa and exponent; if exponent is 0, mantissa is the integer value
  let mut mantissa_result = [0u8; 8];
  let mut exponent_result = [0u8; 4];
  if float_to_mant_exp(
    xfloat_result.as_ptr(), 12,
    mantissa_result.as_mut_ptr(), 8,
    exponent_result.as_mut_ptr(), 4,
  ) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

let mantissa:i64 = i64::from_be_bytes(mantissa_result);
let exponent:i32 = i32::from_be_bytes(exponent_result);

  1 // Success
}
```

#### 5.8.5. XFloat Binary Format Reference

> > **For implementers and tooling authors only.** Contracts must never decode or construct `XFloat` bytes directly. This section exists to support rippled development, debuggers, explorers, and spec verification — not contract authors.

Reviewer: same here

Note that the XRPL WASM VM does not enable the WASM floating-point instruction set (i.e., `f32`/`f64` ops are unavailable to contracts). This means native IEEE 754 arithmetic is not an option regardless of determinism concerns. Contracts that need fixed-point arithmetic independent of the `XFloat` host functions — for example, to work with integer ratios or basis points — should consider crates like the [`fixed`](https://crates.io/crates/fixed) Rust crate, which performs fixed-point math entirely in integer instructions and is fully compatible with the `no_std`, `wasm32v1-none` build target.

#### 5.8.4. XFloat Example Usage

```rust
#![no_std]
#![no_main]

#[unsafe(no_mangle)]
pub extern "C" fn finish() -> i32 {
  // Load an XFloat from a serialized STAmount (IOU variant, 8 bytes)
  let iou_amount_bytes = [0u8; 8]; // obtained from transaction or ledger object

>   let mut xfloat_a = [0u8; 12];

Reviewer 6: Is this the actual intended way to declare a variable as an xfloat?  Would it be ok to create a type around it so the contract developer isn't writing [0u8, 12] everywhere?

  if float_from_stamount(
    iou_amount_bytes.as_ptr(), 8,
    xfloat_a.as_mut_ptr(), 12,
  ) < 0 {
    return 0; // error
  }

  // Convert an integer to XFloat (exponent 0 → value is exactly the mantissa)
  let mut xfloat_b = [0u8; 12];
  if float_from_mant_exp(100, 0, xfloat_b.as_mut_ptr(), 12, 0) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

  // Add the two floats
  let mut xfloat_result = [0u8; 12];
  if float_add(
    xfloat_a.as_ptr(), 12,
    xfloat_b.as_ptr(), 12,
    xfloat_result.as_mut_ptr(), 12,
    0, // TO_NEAREST
  ) < 0 {
    return 0;
  }

  // Extract mantissa and exponent; if exponent is 0, mantissa is the integer value
  let mut mantissa_result = [0u8; 8];

>   let mut exponent_result = [0u8; 4];

Reviewer 6: A similar question about the declaring a variable to hold the mantissa and exponent?  Would it be ok to declare a type instead of byte arrays?

| Function Signature                                                           | Description                                                                                 | Gas Cost |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------|
| `update_data(`<br/>&emsp;`data_ptr: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`data_len: i32`<br />`)` | Update the `Data` field in the ledger object that hosts the WASM code, e.g. a Smart Escrow. | 50       |

### 5.11. Host Function Versioning Rules

The following rules govern the lifecycle of all host functions in this specification and must be respected by all
implementations:

1. **New host functions MAY be added** at any time without breaking existing contracts. Contracts that do not call a
   new function are unaffected.
2. **Host functions MAY be deprecated** with appropriate notice, but deprecated functions MUST remain callable for
   backward compatibility. Deployed contracts may rely on any host function that was available at deployment time.

> 3. **Host functions MUST NOT ever be changed.** Once a host function is deployed — its name, parameter types,

Author: Not sure what I think about this rule. E.g., an amendment might change the meaning of a host function, but then again... should that be allowed? Such a thing would likely break existing contracts assuming the previous functionality.

Author: We're going with option3 for now. Any of the options at our disposal would be mostly unenforceable in code anyway. In addition, we have some checks in [xrpl-wasm-std-lib](https://github.com/ripple/xrpl-wasm-stdlib) to see if any function contracts change. We'll also add a comment into xrpld's host function file to document this social contract. Finally, we don't expect to deprecate any of the existing functions because they all have broadly generalized potential usage.

| :------------------------------------------------------------------------ | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | :------- |
| `set_data(`<br/>&emsp;`data_ptr: i32,`<br/>&emsp;`data_len: i32`<br />`)` | Update the `Data` field in the ledger object that hosts the WASM code, e.g. a Smart Escrow. | 1000     |

### 5.11. Host Function Versioning Rules

The following rules govern the lifecycle of all host functions in this specification and must be respected by all implementations:

1. **New host functions MAY be added** at any time without breaking existing contracts. Contracts that do not call a new function are unaffected.
2. **Host functions MAY be deprecated** with appropriate notice, but deprecated functions MUST remain callable for backward compatibility. Deployed contracts may rely on any host function that was available at deployment time. Deprecation does not remove or change the function — it signals to new contract authors that a function is discouraged, so documentation and tooling (e.g. `xrpl-wasm-stdlib`) can steer new development away from it even though it remains available for existing contracts.

> 3. **Host functions MUST NOT ever be changed.** Once a host function is deployed — its name, parameter types, parameter order, and observable behavior are permanently immutable. This includes buffer sizes, since contracts hardcode allocation sizes (e.g., 20 bytes for an account ID, 12 bytes for an `XFloat`). If a buffer size changes, a new host function with a different name MUST be introduced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Host functions MUST be permanently backwards compatible.** Once a host function is deployed — its name, parameter types, parameter order, and observable behavior are permanently immutable. This includes buffer sizes, since contracts hardcode allocation sizes (e.g., 20 bytes for an account ID, 12 bytes for an `XFloat`). If a buffer size changes, a new host function with a different name MUST be introduced.
```
`If a buffer size changes, a new host function with a different name MUST be introduced.` - did we agree on this? I thought it was fine as long as you still support old behavior, but I might be misremembering.

> These rules ensure that smart contracts compiled and deployed today will continue to execute correctly on future versions of the platform.

Reviewer: Same here

## 6. Rationale

> This section summarizes the main design decisions in this specification and why they were made. The appendices contain the full analysis of the alternatives that were considered.

Reviewer: This para is unnecessary, that's the objective of the `Rationale` section

> - **Interpreted Wasmi runtime.** Different WASM runtimes meter gas differently, so the same code can produce different gas costs across implementations — a consensus hazard. Fixing the runtime (Wasmi), its version, and an interpreted compile mode guarantees identical, deterministic gas costs on every validator. Interpretation also avoids the larger attack surface and platform-dependent behavior of JIT/AOT compilation. See [Appendix A](#appendix-a-other-wasm-vms-considered) for the full comparison of runtimes and compilation modes.

Reviewer: nit: use `:` instead of `.` at the end of each bullet's heading (even better would be a subsection)

### C.4: Will transactions that use the WASM VM be testable via `simulate`?

Yes, though that needs to be tested. This should make it easier for users to estimate gas usage.

### C.5: Why not use native WASM floating point?

> WebAssembly's native `f32` and `f64` types are IEEE 754 binary floating-point. One might ask whether those could be used directly for numeric operations in smart contracts, perhaps with NaN canonicalization to address the one known source of non-determinism in the WASM spec (NaN bit-payload variation when inputs are non-canonical). In practice this would be insufficient for two independent reasons.

Reviewer 6: I feel like this is reading as the only source of non determinism is the NaN canonicalization.  Might be worth calling out there are other reasons like CPU specific behavior around edge cases, compiler optimizations, etc.

Author: Hmmm.... I need to think a bit more about each of those, but I'm only aware of `NaN canonicalization` as being a source of occasional non-determinism. In particular:

> CPU specific behavior around edge cases

We're strictly Wasm v1.0. There shouldn't be any CPU-specific behavior differences since our VM and its instruction-set is standardized. But are there edge-cases I'm not thinking about?

> compiler optimizations,

We store WASM byte-code on ledger, so there shouldn't be any compiler optimizations between nodes executing contracts. Yes the same WASM code might be compiled slightly differently to different WASM byte-code, but not for the same contract. However, am I not thinking about something there?

**Compared to `STAmount` (8 bytes):** `XFloat` uses 4 extra bytes, but provides:

1. **Larger mantissa precision:** 64-bit signed mantissa vs. 54-bit mantissa in `STAmount`
2. **Wider exponent range:** 32-bit signed exponent vs. 8-bit exponent in `STAmount`
3. **Simpler layout:** Unpacked integer fields are straightforward to serialize and deserialize

The 4 extra bytes per value are negligible given the `no_std` stack-only model.

**Compared to `STNumber` (14 bytes):** `XFloat` is 2 bytes shorter because it omits the type prefix — the host functions already know they're working with an `XFloat`, so the prefix is unnecessary.

### C.8: Why are ledger serialization formats unchanged by XFloat?

The 12-byte `XFloat` format is exclusively a host-function buffer convention. Existing ledger serialization formats — including the 8-byte `IouNumber` encoding in `STAmount` — are unchanged by this specification. `float_from_stamount` and `float_from_stnumber` exist to load values from those on-ledger formats into `XFloat` for in-contract computation, without touching how those values are stored or transmitted on the wire.

### C.9: Why is host function immutability required?

> The versioning rules in [§5.11](#511-host-function-versioning-rules) reflect a fundamental constraint of the WASM smart contract platform: deployed contract binaries cannot be updated. A contract compiled against a given set of host function signatures must continue to work correctly on every future version of rippled. This makes host function immutability a hard requirement, not a preference.

Reviewer 6: I think it is also a requirement for replayability which might mean this is the only option?

Reviewer 6: I guess with that being said, there might be something missing here.  Should old transactions replay identically on current versions of the host functions?  That is should we be backward compatible in that way.

Author: Hmmm.... I might be persuaded otherwise, but when it comes to "replayablility of contracts", shouldn't we treat contracts in the same manner that we treat transactors? That is, for transactors, if `xrpld` gets upgraded and an amendment changes its execution layer, then strict replayability won't work. There's some future state where an upgraded transactor won't be able to replay an old state-machine update exactly. So, shouldn't contracts have that same fate? Meaning, if a host function no longer exists in some future world, then a contract will simply panic/fail. We'll try not to make that happen, but I guess `bit-rot` is a real thing and I'm not sure we can engineer around it completely.

> Should old transactions replay identically on current versions of the host functions? 

I suppose answering this more directly, what if the answer is simply "in general, yes, but no guarantees" ?

### C.4: Will transactions that use the WASM VM be testable via `simulate`?

Yes, though that needs to be tested. This should make it easier for users to estimate gas usage.

### C.5: Why not use native WASM floating point?

> WebAssembly's native `f32` and `f64` types are IEEE 754 binary floating-point. One might ask whether those could be used directly for numeric operations in smart contracts, perhaps with NaN canonicalization to address the one known source of non-determinism in the WASM spec (NaN bit-payload variation when inputs are non-canonical). In practice this would be insufficient for two independent reasons.

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
WebAssembly's native `f32` and `f64` types are IEEE 754 binary floating-point. While they could be used directly for numeric operations in smart contracts, perhaps with NaN canonicalization to address the one known source of non-determinism in the WASM spec (NaN bit-payload variation when inputs are non-canonical), in practice this would be insufficient for two independent reasons:
```

Second, and more fundamentally, XRPL's `Number` arithmetic is itself **complex, carefully specified, and subject to change via ledger amendment.** The rippled implementation encodes years of decisions about rounding, normalization, overflow handling, and edge cases for decimal calculations. There is no Rust equivalent in this library, and there should not be: porting that logic correctly would be a significant maintenance burden, and any divergence — even a single rounding edge case — would produce a contract that computes results differently from rippled. Worse, if the `Number` arithmetic is ever changed by a ledger amendment, contracts that embedded their own copy of the logic would silently continue using the old behavior while the rest of the ledger moved to the new one.

The host function design ensures that **all contracts always use exactly the arithmetic rippled uses at execution time.** No porting, no maintenance, no drift.

### C.6: Why not provide a Rust implementation of Number arithmetic in `xrpl-wasm-stdlib`?

> For reasons related to C.5, `xrpl-wasm-stdlib` deliberately does not ship a Rust implementation of `Number` arithmetic. Such an implementation would face the same amendment-drift problem defined in C.5: it would be frozen at the version of the logic that existed when it was written. The correct abstraction boundary is the host function interface — contracts call into rippled, rippled's `Number` class does the math, and the contract receives the result as an opaque 12-byte buffer. This keeps the arithmetic logic in exactly one place.

Reviewer: This should also mention that it would be more gas/performance-efficient to do it in C++

For similar reasons, `xrpl-wasm-stdlib` deliberately does not ship a Rust implementation of `Number` arithmetic. Such an
implementation would face the same amendment-drift problem: it would be frozen at the version of the logic that existed
when it was written. The correct abstraction boundary is the host function interface — contracts call into rippled,
rippled's `Number` class does the math, and the contract receives the result as an opaque 12-byte buffer. This keeps the
arithmetic logic in exactly one place.

### C.7: Why the 12-byte encoding for OpaqueFloat?

Using an unpacked 12-byte layout (4-byte exponent + 8-byte mantissa) rather than existing XRPL serialization formats:

**Compared to STAmount (8 bytes):** OpaqueFloat uses 4 extra bytes, but provides:
1. **Larger mantissa precision:** 64-bit signed mantissa vs. 54-bit mantissa in STAmount
2. **Wider exponent range:** 32-bit signed exponent vs. 8-bit exponent in STAmount
3. **Simpler layout:** Unpacked integer fields are straightforward to serialize and deserialize

The 4 extra bytes per value are negligible given the `no_std` stack-only model.

> **Compared to STNumber (14 bytes):** OpaqueFloat is 2 bytes shorter because it omits the type prefix — the host

Author: After talking to @oleks-rip, the xrpld implementation is using standard `STNumber` serialization. We still need the `float_from_stnumber` function in order to properly canonicalize all instances of `OpaqueFloat`.
